>> Good morning, everybody.
And welcome to WWDC 2009.
My name is Allan Schaffer, I'm Apple's Technology
Graphics Evangelist, and I'm going to be talking
to you this morning about game development for the iPhone.
So welcome to the center of the universe.
[ Laughter ]
>> You know, last year I got up here and I
had the privilege of making the prediction
that we were all witnessing the
birth of a new mobile games platform.
We talked last year about the iPhone 3G and the iPod touch
as being such fantastic platforms for handheld games.
Last year went through a lot of technologies that are
available on the iPhone, iPhone -- and iPod touch.
Things like touch input, to be able to directly
manipulate a character within your game,
and the kind of game play experiences that that enables.
Also talked about the accelerometer.
So just the idea of being able to use the
orientation of the device as a game controller itself.
Also, the iPhone is always connected.
And so the ability to have multiplayer
game experiences was created for you then.
Last year we also went through a lot
of the graphics and media technologies.
We started with a rich graphic
stack use OpenGL ES on the iPhone.
Went into the capabilities for audio playback
and recording, and also for video playback.
So you guys took all of that stuff
and it's just been an amazing year.
I think you saw something like
this yesterday and downstairs.
These are a few of the icons of games that are on the
App Store today, and I just have a question for you guys,
the audience, raise your hand if you
have an app published on the App Store.
I'm curious to see.
Wow, okay, so that's very cool.
All right, and you know games have been huge.
The gaming category on the App Store
is the largest category on that store.
And you guys deserve a huge round of applause for
what you've accomplished in the previous year.
So thank you guys.
[ Applause ]
>> So this year of course we're talking about iPhone OS 3.0,
and the technologies that have been
added there for game development.
On the left, the game kit API, giving you the
ability to have network gaming over Bluetooth,
and head-to-head communication
between two different instances
of your application on a device iPod library access.
So letting you take the user's iPod library, and the play
list, and the songs that they have synced onto their device,
and have those play as the background
sound track within your game.
OpenGL ES 2.0.
So now for game developers, the shader pipeline
that you need to develop rich and powerful graphics
on the new iPhone 3G S is enabled for you through that API.
And something that's very interesting, and I'm
sure a lot of game developers have been thinking
about is how they can take in that purchase and use that to
unlock levels in their game or download additional content.
And needless to say also, the iPhone 3G S, being able
to take this new platform with higher performance
and incredible graphics compatibilities
and load and use that for game play.
So to show off some of these capabilities and
just the things that we've been talking about,
I want to bring back up on stage Graeme Devine, who you saw
yesterday during the Graphics and Media State of the Union.
He's going to tell you a little bit more about shock.
Graeme, take it away.
>> Good morning.
Yesterday we showed you a little bit about shock.
Today I'm going tell you a little
bit about how we actually made it.
So five days ago we were asked to make a demo for WWDC.
And you know, that's not much time to make a demo.
But we were given a bunch of engineers, and a phone.
A lot of people hadn't seen the phone before.
It's the very first time they've seen the iPhone 3G S.
And the one thing that struck us was
it has a CPU, which is quite powerful,
but it has a GPU, which is extremely powerful.
So what would be interesting to us was to write a
sandbox application, something that was really simple,
and yet could show off the power of the GPU which is
where we wanted to spend the majority of our time working.
So we came up with the idea of this highly scoped, this
really simple game that was just really a sandbox game.
And we had this game up and running in one day.
Or maybe even on the first hour.
And it was really easy to get up and running.
And then we started to add shaders to the
background, and shaders to the demonstration.
So the first stage was really very, very simple.
It was three lines of GLSL code.
And a couple things struck me about that.
Last time I wrote a shader was in assembly code.
And this is all in C code.
And it's way easier than it ever
was before to write a shader.
This is a fragment shader up and running in
just a few lines of code, doing stuff per pixel.
So the smoke simulation that you see running is actually six
or seven shaders, and it took us about three days to write.
It inserts density and velocity with the ball, and
you can see that the bat; see if I move the bat up
and down (you know, I hate to lose the game) as
we effect the smoke simulation in the background.
But the key thing is the simulation
is completely solved on the GPU.
The CPU isn't doing any of the work.
Leaving your CPU free to do things like
AI, networking, voice chat, or play pong.
One thing that struck us too, was once
we had the simple game up and running
and the shader running, we could change the pallets.
Lots of ways to be able to change pallets.
One of the easiest ways is to be able to
just insert a few more lines of GLSL code.
But because we're working on a team
with artists, we actually made a texture
that would let the artist adjust the pallet for
us, and that generally gets much better results,
because you get things like this fire,
actually, then, that looks pretty darn cool.
So if you're listening to the sound,
we added sound into the game as well.
And you can hear if we stop for a second-or if I stop
for a second-that the sound is actually working 3D,
and bouncing from one side of the room to the other.
I think this is the loudest game of tennis ever.
The sound was actually written by an
Apple engineer in the CoreOS group.
We've a great team working on this project.
Then lastly, we made one more shader.
Which is a bump map shader.
This is nine lines of GLSL.
And you might think, well, I know how to write nine
lines of code that just casts a light around a ball.
But actually it's taking a normal map and it's attenuating
the light based upon the normal, in the normal map,
and doing the correct falloff for that light, and working
out how the actual light would work against that normal map,
and presenting that-so you can see around
the ball here, that it's actually falling off
around the actual textures in the background.
And all of that is nine lines of GLSL.
Now I don't know about you, but last time I wrote a
bump map shader, it was a few more lines than nine.
The power of the GPU is absolutely incredible,
and we were able to make this application
in a very short amount of time.
Using -- it was really a good little crash course in a
small disciplined team showing off the power of the GPU.
But it was a lot of fun to work on, and
we're still using this today at Apple
to be able to play around with more shaders.
And so we wanted to just give you a quick little
background on some of the work that went into making this.
Thank you very much.
>> So thank you, Graeme.
And it's a little cruel of me, I think, to make you have
to play the game while you were talking about it as well.
That had to have been kind of tough.
So for folks -- today, this is a two-part session.
Here in part one I'm going to spend some time talking about
graphics and audio, and then after lunch we'll come back
to talk about game kit, the accelerometer, and store kit.
So let's just dive straight in with graphics,
and we're going to focus on OpenGL ES.
So OpenGL ES is the high performance
3D graphics API that you use for many
of the games that you see on the App Store today.
It's designed for hardware accelerated 3D rendering.
And OpenGL ES is the mobile variant of
the OpenGL standard from the desktop.
It's defined by an industry consortium called
the Khronos Group, of which Apple is a member.
And really, OpenGL ES represents a distillation of the API
that you find on the desktop, brought down, -simplified,
and made more efficient and appropriate
for the capabilities of mobile devices,
which is as you can see are very, very capable.
And really, what OpenGL ES is, is the front leading edge
of the capabilities that you find on OpenGL on the desktop.
There's a lot of the older functionality that have
been built up over the years in the desktop API
that simply didn't need to be brought
over on to a mobile device.
There's more efficient ways of submitting
geometry now and doing other thingso only
that functionality has been brought into OpenGL ES.
So there's a subtle point that we need
to make regarding OpenGL ES versions
that are now supported on iPhone OS devices.
We have some devices that support OpenGL ES version 1.1,
and other devices such as the iPhone 3G S that support both,
OpenGL ES 1.1, and 2.0, which is
a more capable graphics pipeline.
So a lot of times when you hear us talking about OpenGL,
you're hear us discussing this graphics pipeline.
The parts that are in purple up here are intended
to be essentially the elements that
are under direct control by you.
So the OpenGL ES API, the definition of your 3D geometry
and textures, and the creation of frame buffer surface.
And the parts in blue are intended to
represent the elements of the pipeline
that are implemented in the GPU hardware itself.
And so ES 1.1 implements a fixed function pipeline.
And so that means that each one of those blue
stages is essentially burned into the silicon.
And there are elements that you can
manipulate for the different stages.
For example, you can change texture modes, or adjust,
enable stenciling, change the blending modes, and so on,
enable lighting up on the vertex processing stage.
But fundamentally, that API is fixed,
and its functionality is fixed.
So the ES 1.1 API is targeted to
hardware that supports that pipeline.
Now all of the rendering that is
done in OpenGL ES kind of --
or all of the APIs calls kind of boil down into these
three categories where you're either creating objects,
things like textures or buffers to render into,
you're setting graphics state, that right-hand column,
for changing basically knobs and dials along the
graphics pipeline to control how the next element
to come through the pipeline will be rendered.
And then you're submitting 3D geometry.
You know, things like your vertices,
normals, colors, and texture coordinates.
So now let's draw the contrast between that and the
OpenGL ES 2.0 pipeline that you find on the iPhone 3G S.
So this is a programmable pipeline.
And many of the stages in the hardware
are now programmable by you.
You write shader, so you write these little
C-like programs using the GL shading language.
That is compiled by the system and
loaded directly into the hardware.
And then the geometry and the different graphics, 3D
data, that is submitted to that hardware then runs
through the pipeline, but using the program that
you wrote to actually handle the processing.
So the objects now, you have another
type of object, which are shaders.
Vertex shaders and fragment shaders that can
be loaded into different parts of the pipeline.
A lot of things about setting graphics state
now actually just becomes about writing
that shader and loading it into the GPU itself.
And of course there's a new API now or a different API
for submitting 3D geometry using uniforms and attributes,
and then sampler is kind of a search case
for texture data coming into the vertex unit.
So we're actually not going to really
teach you guys OpenGL at this conference,
and certainly not in the 20 minutes
that I'm spending on it here.
So to learn the basics of OpenGL the places to
start are the OpenGL ES 2.0 Programming Guide.
This will go into the shader pipeline quite a bit.
They call it the Gold Book-it's kind of gold
and purple, and that's what you're looking for.
If you want to get more information about using the GL
shading language, there's the so-called Orange Book,
OpenGL Shading Language, now in a second edition.
Apple has published a lot of information about
our implementation of OpenGL on the iPhone,
so that's The OpenGL Es Programming Guide for iPhone.
Then for those of you who are maybe thinking about also
using OpenGL on the desktop, this is a good place to start.
The so-called Red Book is the OpenGL programming guide
really for a lot of us who have been using OpenGL
for a long time-this is probably where we got started.
And then there's a tremendous amount
of resources up on the web.
And so OpenGL.org is a great place to go.
Now I wanted to pay special attention.
This is where you can find the spec. And I would say that
those books I showed you can kind of take a beginning
up to being, you know, an intermediate
to slightly advanced user.
But to really become an advanced user of OpenGL you have
to read the spec, and really learn about how the internals
of that API really work, rather than
just how to use the API from above.
So check that out.
Now those of you who are knowledgeable about
OpenGL ES already and just want to be --
maybe you're not really this familiar
with iPhone programming and you want
to know how can I drop some OpenGL ES code onto
the iPhone and kind of get it to work with all
of these other frameworks, like
Core Animation and UIKit, and so on.
We provide a template in Xcode that lets you just
drop some code into the DrawView routine there,
and you can really get up and running
really, really quickly.
So check that out.
But all right, so for this.
For today where I want to actually spend the most time is
to talk about our implementation of OpenGL ES on the iPhone.
And the first place to start is to
remind you about these platforms.
So here we have a list of the different devices on the left,
and the different variants of API in the other two columns.
Notice that OpenGL ES 1.1 is supported
across the product line.
And so this is how applications that are in the App Store
today all written using OpenGL ES are going to be able
to run on the iPhone 3G S, and of
course are already running there.
Now for the iPhone 3G S we also support OpenGL ES 2.0.
And so that's the API that's going to enable the shader
pipeline to be used- that's available on that hardware.
So it's important to notice, also, that that
means that the iPhone 3G S really has kind
of two different paths that it can take for applications.
Both versions of OpenGL can co-exist on the same device,
and we'll be showing you a few best
practices about that in just a minute.
So you need to now decide which version of
OpenGL are you going to use for your application,
and the decision should fundamentally come from
the requirements of what you need to be rendering.
So for a lot of the very hardcore game developers,
they've been asking us, we need that shader pipeline
and we need a device that can implement that in hardware.
So for those folks, obviously, it
would be a choice of OpenGL ES 2.0.
But also, well, you may also want to have a product
with the widest reach, and that can be addressed,
can load on all of the products in the product line.
So for that choice you would choose OpenGL ES 1.1.
And so how you reconcile these two things.
Well, this is the way.
So what you should probably do is if your application
needs the shader pipeline of OpenGL ES 2.0,
you are capable of implementing it to use that pipeline,
but then also implement code in your application
to provide an ES 1.1 fall-back
path for all of the other devices.
All right?
So that's something we would really recommend that people
look into, to get the best reach between platform capability
on one hand, and capability of the hardware on the other.
So to do this in code is -- this is
configured by the EAGL context object.
And so when you initialize the EAGL content you
actually define which API you want to be using.
You make a choice between ES 2 or ES 1.
And it's important to note you can make
both of these calls in one application.
If you request the ES 2 context on, say, an iPod touch,
you don't have hardware there that would be capable
of supporting that, so that call will fail.
But then, it will return nil.
But you can then go and try to initialize
the API with ES 1, and that will succeed.
Now I want to switch gears a little bit and talk about
some of the extensions to OpenGL that are of interest
on this platform, and maybe just to back up a little bit.
So every version of OpenGL defines some
core functionality for that version.
And then in addition to that, there are a
number of extensions specific to that version
which have been either added by the vendors
themselves, some have been added by Apple,
some have been sort of standardized
by the Khronos Group and so on.
And there's core functionality and then there's this
sort of cloud of extensions around each version.
And as the versions progress, the trend is for a lot of
the more popular extensions sometimes to make their way
into the core of the next version of OpenGL.
And so that's something that indeed happened
with the frame buffer object extension.
So on the iPhone, we use the frame
buffer object extension extensively.
It is the destination for all of the
rendering that's done in OpenGL on the iPhone.
And so every time that you set up your surfaces in
OpenGL ES you're creating a frame buffer object.
And then all of the rendering will end up there.
So this was an extension in OpenGL
ES 1.1 in our implementation there,
and it's now become a core feature of OpenGL ES 2.0.
The second extension here is PVRTC.
So this is Powered VR Texture Compression.
And it's because it's important to be using, because
memory is such a precious commodity on mobile hardware.
So this is a way that lets you take a
compressed representation of texture images
and load those compressed representations into
memory and keep them compressed when they're there.
And then the hardware is able to decode that in
realtime as those textures are being referenced.
And the third one here is a really interesting one.
It's an extension that we've added called
the limited non-power-of-2 extension.
So a lot of times you might want to define a texture that
is something other than a power of two in dimensions, know,
something where it has different dimensions,
and in particular one that would be interesting
on the iPhone hardware is 480 by 320.
Because that corresponds to the size of the display.
So the support for non-power-of-2
textures is core in OpenGL ES 2.0.
So in OpenGL ES 2.0, you just get it.
And the way that the textures are referenced
there is through pixel coordinates.
It's through pixel coordinates you
can use bitmapping- there's a lot
of functionality that's associated
with that core feature set.
We decided that since the hardware on the iPhone 3G S can
actually support these non-power-of-2 dimension textures,
that we would port that functionality back to the
OpenGL ES 1.1 implementation on the iPhone 3G S.
And so it's a limited availability
extension, and it's available there.
And so it's called the texture 2D limited npot-.
So now let me spend a little more time on PVRTC,
because this is something we really
want to drive home with developers.
This allows you to take an original
image, say a 32-bit PNG or2 TIF image,
and compress its depth down to 2 or 4 bits per pixel.
There's various modes that you can set as you're doing
the compressions, sort of one for linear weighting
for how the compression is down, and one
more tuned for the human visual perception.
But the main benefit of doing this is the memory savings.
Taking an image from 32 bits down to 4, I mean,
that's an incredible amount of memory savings.
And usually a game using OpenGL ES
is going to have a lot of textures.
So there's also a performance benefit from doing so.
Reducing the amount of memory that has to be moved
around as objects are being rendered can reduce the
memory bandwidth pressure as you're drawing your scene,
and give you performance enhancement because of that.
So we provide a tool with the SDK,
and this is the path to it here.
Now I wanted to do a quick comparison
of different PVRTC results.
So the image on the left here is
the uncompressed original PNG image.
And this is an explosion sequence that
we took from the Touch Fighter game
that we showed everybody at last year's WWDC.
You see, it's a texture atlas defining sort
of an animation sequence for that explosion.
Now on the left, original 32-bit image.
In the middle there is the compressed
down to 4 bits per pixel using PVRTC.
I know that we're projecting this, and
it might be a little hard to detect.
There are only some slight differences in that image.
Now if you go down to 2 bits per pixel, in that
one you can start to notice some artifacting,
and it depends on how detailed
you need your imagery to remain.
So PVRTC is great for sort of natural,
real-world looking textures.
It's less well suited for things like
line art or vector type graphics.
But for this sort of thing it's really great.
And of course the memory savings, 8X
memory savings, 16X memory savings.
So just a couple of best practices to bear in mind as
we're talking about textures on the iPhone OS hardware.
So I'll drive this home again.
Minimize your texture storage requirements.
You always want to be treating memory
on the device as a precious commodity.
And I saw how many of you raised your hands about loading
your apps, getting apps published on the App Store.
You know how precious that memory is.
So the thing to do is, you know, the
first stop is to try and use PVRTC.
Probably try the 4 bit depth for that.
And sort of a pro tip that some people will do, you
know, we'll hear from developers, well, you know,
the compression quality of PVRTC isn't quite what
I want, so I'm sticking with my original image.
What you could actually do is sample from a larger
original image than what you would be using in your game.
So say you had a 512 by 512 32-bit depth image.
Well, what would happen if you increased the --
if you had art work that originally
existed at 1 K by 1 K, 32-bit depth.
You could depress that into a 4 built PVRTC.
And if you work out the math it will actually save you
half of the memory compared to that 512 x 512 32-bit image.
It's a great way -- and the quality is very comparable.
So it's a great way to use PVRTC.
The second thing, obviously, if PVRTC isn't going
to work for you then maybe you want to switch
over to use a 16-bit depth, just raw
depth on your images instead of 32.
And we provide a number of different formats for
you to use, 4444, 5551 Alpha, and 565 with no Alpha.
And just a reminder, OpenGL ES makes a copy
of your texture data when you define it.
It keeps its own separate copy.
So you can deallocate a copy that you've perhaps loaded
from a file if you're not going to be needing it any more.
And then one more thing is we -- OpenGL programmers
are always talking minimizing stay changes.
And so that previous example, where I
had all the different explosions burned
into one texture image, that was a texture atlas.
And you're able to achieve some
efficiency games because of that.
Essentially, you can load that one texture and
reference all 16 of the explosions within it,
rather than having to load 16 different textures and
switch between them with state changes at runtime.
All right, so I've talked about all of the platforms, and
there's actually one more platform that I want to address.
So let's go back to our chart.
We have the iPhone 3G S, 3G, iPhone,
iPod touch 2nd Gen, and the iPod touch.
And there is one more that game
developers really need to spend a lot
of time focusing on, and it's the Simulator, okay?
So the Simulator supports now in the 3.0 SDK supports both
an ES 1.1 implementation and an ES 2.0 implementation.
Which -- that is fantastic.
For developers to be able to have all -- either one of those
choices available as they do their programming on their Mac
with the Simulator is going to
really speed up your workflow.
And just think about the other tools.
If you're familiar with working with shaders, you know,
you can use things like Quartz Composer to make live edits
on a GLSL shader on the Mac, and
then very easily take that shader
with minor modifications and bring it over into OpenGL ES.
So it's a great environment for you to
work in, to be able to use the Simulator.
Now there's some fine print, of course.
So when you're using the Simulator for game development you
need to always keep in mind that the functionality is there.
The ES 2.0 implementation and the
ES 1.1 implementation are there.
But the performance is going to be very, very
different from what you see on the device.
And it's because the performance is depending
on what kind of Mac you're running on
and a number of different things like that.
So use the Simulator basically just
for your coding and development time.
It's to give you faster turn around on minor changes in your
builds, but not so much where you would necessarily look
at the Simulator to figure out if you're
doing the right thing for performance.
When you're testing for performance, and
you should be always testing performance
as well, you need to be doing that on a device.
So be sure to be hopping back and
forth between the two of them.
Now a couple of fine print about the Simulator.
Number one, it doesn't enforce all of
the same OpenGL ES error generation
that you might actually find when
you're on the hardware itself.
There's limits in the hardware that are
not necessarily enforced on the Simulator.
Let me give you an example.
On the original iPhone, iPod touch, iPhone 3G, and iPod
touch second generation you have a 24 megabyte limit
for the textures and surfaces that you can load into OpenGL.
Now that limit no longer exists on the iPhone 3G S.
There's no architectural limitation, you just are
limited by however much memory you have available.
So the Simulator, though, does not enforce that
limit no matter how you're running the application.
It doesn't know which hardware you would be running that on.
And so just bear that in mind.
Likewise, it's a different architecture.
You know, on the power on all of the iPhone devices
use a tile-based deferred renderer within the GPU.
And that's the architecture of the GPU.
And it's just-it would be a different
representation in the Simulator.
So use the Simulator to test for code correctness in
your code paths, use the device to test for performance.
But all right, so folks, that's going
to end now the part of the section
on graphics, and I would like to move on to audio.
So we're going to start with audio
just to -- sort of a high level view.
The Audio Toolbox framework that's available on the
iPhone provides a broad set of APIs for audio playback
and audio recording for a variety
of different application types.
But for today, I want to focus on specifically the APIs
that you might use for games, and I have a specific scenario
in mind that you might be using the OpenAL API, which
is a 3D spatial audio API to play your game sounds,
and then you might be taking music out of the
IpodLibrary to play the background sound track.
And so I'd like to talk to you about how you
would accomplish that thing together today.
So let's start with OpenAL.
So OpenAL is an API for 3D audio mixing, and we
see it in use in a lot of the sound effects in --
we see it in use in a lot of the applications
in games that are up on the App Store today,
just like we see OpenGL in such heavy use as well.
And OpenGL is modeling audio in a 3D space as its being
heard by a single listener who is moving around in
that 3D space, and may be changing his location,
changing his orientation to hear things,
and hear things in different ears
as he moves around, and so on.
Now OpenAL mimics a lot of the conventions that you
may be familiar with from the OpenGL side of the world.
So things like the coronet space can be made
in common between these two different APIs.
A lot of the actual programming style is similar
as well, where you're setting up a context,
and then all of the things that you're doing with the
API after that point are relative to that context.
Now on the iPhone, our implementation is OpenAL
1.1 without the audio capture functionality.
So it's simply a playback API.
And our implementation there is built
on top of the remote I/O audio unit.
So that provides you with very low
latency playback of your sounds in OpenAL.
And OpenAL is an open standard, you can actually find
out a lot more about it on the OpenAL.org web site.
But now I'm going to go into a bit more detail and
walk through some of the fundamentals of OpenAL.
So there's three fundamental concepts with OpenAL.
You have sources, and sources are a 3D point in space, or
excuse me, a point in the 3D space, that is emitting audio.
So in a game perhaps that would be an opponent
or a game piece, or some character crawling
across your tower defense environment,
emitting audio as it goes around.
You have buffers, which are the
data containers for the audio.
And then the listener is you, corresponding
to, for example, if you're using OpenGL,
corresponding to the I point that you set in OpenGL.
And it's the position in the 3D space from
where you're hearing those sources being played.
So I'm going to unwind this now,
go back through these things.
So in OpenAL the listener defines the context
for the audio playback that's going to occur.
There's one listener moving around,
being positioned in the virtual space.
And its position orientation is defined -- excuse me --
the orientation of the listener is defined by two vectors.
It's a vector of which direction they're facing,
and then also a vector that defines which way is up.
So that way if you change the up direction to something
else then the ears, the stereo playback might change.
So here you see a little bit of code that is
how you might set the listener orientation.
We are defining an up vector here with a positive Z going
up, and, excuse me, -- the looking-at vector is positive Z.
So this is like we're looking straight out.
And the up vector is up, with Y up.
Okay, the next fundamental objects are sources
And each source is a sound in the game
-- or is a sound source in the game.
And as I say, maybe these are opponents, or maybe
these are different game elements that are flying
around in the 3D space, and em=itting some audio.
And so there's a number of different attributes that you
can actually set to control how sources are rendered.
You can change their attenuation, to have control
of the fall-off as the source moves away from you.
You can adjust the pitch of the
playback of that audio from that source.
You can set up the source to loop the contents of its
buffers, so it just keeps on playing it over and over again.
All right, and so on.
So here's again just some sample code.
The first line we're attaching up
to a buffer; I'll cover that next.
We're configuring some attributes on the source.
So here's we're setting is, yes, we want looping.
We're setting the position of the
source in space to some XYZ value,
and we're defining a reference distance
for that attenuation fall-off curve.
And then when we call AL source play, that source is going
to start to be rendered within our 3D sound environ=ment.
And the final fundamental topic here are buffers.
And these are containers of the audio data itself.
And there are two different ways of defining buffers that --
and the two methods of doing this have differences in terms
of how they implement their memory behavior.
So AL buffer data and AL buffer data static are the two
different ways that you might load data into a buffer.
With AL buffer data, OpenAL is going to copy the
data you provide into its own internal buffers.
And so it will have its own handle
to, you know, that audio data,
and you're able to release your own copy to conserve memory.
But better may be to use the OpenAL buffer data static
extension that we've added into our implementation.
So with this one, OpenAL simply references the
data, the memory that you have provided to it.
And it's very important, then, for you to realize
that you can't go messing around with that data
if it's potentially going to still be used by OpenAL.
So you must not dispose of the data memory while it's in
use, and in particular there are some intricate behaviors
that you need to be aware of if you are, if
your application is using multiple threads.
And so we're going be covering some of the best practices
for using the AL buffer data static method routine
in the audio playback or the audio
playback session at 5 o'clock, later today.
Let's now move on to just walking
through some code for setting up OpenAL.
And before I start this I want to make a mention, both this
session and the one after lunch I'm going to be having a lot
of sequences like this where I walk through code.
You guys don't have to write all of this down.
All of the code I'm taking is either from published
examples that are already up on the Dev Center or examples
that have been published for WWDC, or that we'll have
published within another day or two, there's one of those.
And so don't worry about it.
Just watch the sequence here and learn the flow,
and you can go back and read the details of the code
so you don't have to be typing furiously.
Okay, so the first step here is
creating the listener object in OpenAL.
So we open the device and on the iPhone,
we'll use the default system output as
the output for your OpenAL rendering.
So this will depend on whether you have, for example,
the head phones plugged in or not, and so on.
Now Step 2 here is to create an OpenAL context,
meaning the mixer, or implicitly what this means is
to create the listener that's going
to be used for rendering.
And so this will be the object that all of
the sounds are rendered sort of relative to.
And so we create our context here, passing in the device.
And we make that context current.
And now this is going be the active object
that all of the sources that we define
after this will be local to this context.
I want to note, it's actually as I mentioned before,
it's interesting how this correlates over with OpenGL ES.
You go through a lot of the same, you know, a lot of
the same API steps, where you're creating a context
and then making it current to control a lot
of your rendering behavior there as well.
All right, so going now to the next step.
We have our listener, the next step is
to create sources and to create a buffer.
So the first -- up here, we're going to create an OpenAL
buffer object that we're going use to store the audio data.
And then we fill that buffer using the AL buffer data
static method that I'd shown you to the previous slide.
Setting the format, sending in
the data, the size, and the rate.
Now remember, since we're using the buffer data static
extension, OpenAL is referencing your copy of that memory,
so you cannot delete it if it's
potentially still going to be used.
Number 6. Okay, now we create a source object, and
we're going to hook that source up to the buffer.
So now we have all of our pieces in place.
And we can now go and play whatever that sound was.
So we set some attributes on the source, here we're
setting the looping position and reference distance
like I showed you on that previous slide,
and set the source to begin playing.
And now the listener is going to start hearing that source.
And then every frame or every time
through our game loop now,
we can be changing different attributes
on the source and the listener.
So here we're changing the position of the source, we're
changing the position of the listener in XYZ space,
and changing the orientation of the listener as well.
All right, so that was a quick run-through
of the sort of capability that you are --
through some of the fundamental capabilities
that you'll use if you're using OpenAL.
And I certainly recommend if you're
developing a game that needs any kind
of spatialized audio that you'll look into this API.
So moving on in our scenario now, they have
our sort of game sounds set up through OpenAL.
And we want to now go and use the
iPod library access to load
in background music that's going
to be the sound track to our game.
So iPod library access provides you with,
well, you know, access to the iPod library.
You're able to instruct the library to playback the
user's music directly from within your application.
And it also provides a built-in user interface for
choosing songs, or letting them choose songs to play.
Also, there are programmatic interfaces to this, so you can
programmatically search the library for content or playlist,
and construct a queue of what you searched -- of those
search results -- and queue those up to be played as well.
And as I said, the scenario here is that
we're mixing that playback with sort
of the foreground audio sounds coming from OpenAL.
So let me just kind of walk you through
the different parts of this API.
The first is that you have the
iPod library on the device itself.
And it contains a whole lot of media items.
There's a separate media item object
for every song or every audio book,
or every audio Podcast that's synced over to that device.
So there could be a lot of media items.
Now media items can also be organized
in the library in collections.
You might think of collections being all the songs
by one artist, or all the songs on one album,
or all the songs in a playlist
that have been defined by the user.
You're able to get at all of that information as well.
Then pull music out of the library, to select what you're
going to be playing from the library there's two objects.
Either the Media Picker, which is some built
in user interface to be able to just --
for the user to just select from albums and artists
and play lists and so on, or as I said, a music query,
which is going to let you programmatically
decide what to playback.
And then the final object here on the
right is the MusicPlayerController.
And so this is the object that you'll
actually use to playback those media items.
So let's look inside a media item.
Here we have one song.
So it's media type is "music," the song title
is "Hanging Around," by the Venetian Blinds --
made it up -- and the album is "Open Up."
Okay, and here also you can get at the album
art work for that particular album, all right?
There's actually a whole lot of other
metadata that you can get at for each song
or each media item that's in the library.
This is a list of all of the things
that you can get on a media item here.
It's kind of what you would expect.
Over on the left-hand side, title,
artist, album, genre, and so on.
Then there's some more dynamic information about
that media item over here, the items on the right.
To get at the data there's a method on the
MPMediaItem object called value for property.
You just pass in the appropriate
string, it's actually a longer string
than what I'm showing you here,
but you can get at that data.
So those are items, and now we
also have collections of items.
And so here, for example, might be the collection of all
of the songs that I have loaded from the Venetian Blinds.
And so we have these five songs on loaded in our library.
Or a collection could be a play list that the
user has put together of a sequence of songs.
All right, and to get at the data for a collection,
it's sort of a lot of the same process here.
So a collection is an ordered list of items.
You know, your play list, they play in a certain
order, albums play in a certain order, and so on.
So you can get the array of MPMediaItems directly
out of the collection just with the items method.
Every collection also has a representative item.
So maybe this is the one item that you
would use to get the album art work
if you were looking at a list of different albums.
And in the case of the media play list
subclass, which is a subclass of the collection,
there's a number of additional properties that are defined,
that you're able to get at, that are specific to play lists.
Like their name, a persistent ID, attributes of
that play list, and seed items for genus play lists.
It'll tell you the media item that was
used to generate that genius play list.
So okay, so that's tells you what's in the library.
Let's now talk to you about getting
the stuff out of the library.
So first we'll show you the Media Picker.
So this is it.
It's a very similar user experience
to what you're probably accustomed
to from using the iPod application
that's shipped with the device.
You're able to choose -- it presents different
play lists, artists, songs, albums, and so on.
And you can just navigate around in this in
the way that you're already familiar with.
And so to present this to the user,
we're just going to call the allocate
for this class, it's called the MPMediaPickerController.
We'll set up a delegate, so that delegate is going to
receive the list of MPMediaItems that they selected.
And then we present.- This object is a View
Controller, so we just present it modally.
If we selected it to animate, then
it will animate in from the bottom,
and the user is then able to then
go and pick some media items.
Then after they made their choices, one of
these two delegate methods is going to fire.
Either Media Picker did pick media items, and you'll
be presented with a collection of what they chose,
or Media Picker did cancel, if they cancelled out.
Because we've provided them with a way to get
out of this interface once they've gone in.
So that's it.
I mean, if you just want to present that to your user, you
just pop up that UI, they chose the music that they want
to play, and boo, you're off, and you
can skip this next section and just wait
for me to talk about the player controller.
But let's say that you do actually
want to programmatically get
at the music that's in the library to make choices yourself.
So you use MediaQuery for that.
And so there's sort of a sequence of events that
you go through when you're using a MediaQuery.
So typically, you can just allocate one of these
and then start adding essentially predicates to it.
But it's perhaps a little bit simpler if you
actually start from one of the built-in queries.
And we have built-in queries for
albums, artists, songs, and so on.
So down here at the bottom, two examples.
So the first query is just doing a songs
query and returning the NS array of all
of the media items that are loaded in the user's library.
The second one is loading -- returning an
NS array of collections which represent all
of the play list that they have loaded in their library.
Okay, but -- so you started from one of those
built-in queries, and now you can actually go
and add -- and basically filter down further.
You can add media predicates to construct compound queries.
So you're setting up -- excuse me
-- so your predicate will be based
on a particular property that you want to search for.
Maybe like album title or song title or play list name.
And then you'll provide the value that you're
looking for and the search will be done.
So let's look at some of those properties that
you can -- there they are, they're in the middle.
So the properties you can use to search for to construct
a -- a predicate are listed here in the middle.
So persistent ID, media type, artist,
and so on and so forth.
And you notice that actually this is a shorter list than
all of the properties that are available for a media item.
Remember, there are things like -- you know,
what track number is this on the album.
You probably wouldn't want to actually do
a search for all song number 4's on albums.
It just wouldn't make sense.
These are the ones that make sense to be searching for.
And likewise, a media play list also provides these
properties that you can construct a predicate with.
And now at runtime the top line there is that you can
actually query to see which properties you're allowed
to construct predicates with, and it's a
class method called "can filter by property."
All right, so now let's put all of this together.
So the first line here, we're going to query the
library, we're going to start with a songs query.
We're going to look for all -- within that group,
we're going to construct a search predicate of all
of the artists whose names match our
favorite band now, the Venetian Blinds,
and we add that predicate to the
query to refine those results.
So now the final NS array here is going to be an array
of MPMediaItems containing the results of that query.
All right, so that is how you can construct a MediaQuery.
So now let me go to the final part of this.
The MusicPlayerController object.
And this actually is really interesting.
This comes in two flavors.
You can see indicating here, the application
music player and the iPod music player.
And the behaviors of these two objects are different-you
need to make a choice as to which one you're going to use.
For games, I recommend that you use the
application music player, and here's why.
So the application music player is going to playback
the media items sort of within your application
or within the bounds of your application.
And so when you quit your app the playback will stop.
Okay? That's probably what you want, if you're a game.
Now the other variant is to use the iPod music player.
So with that one, you're essentially
handing a queue of items
over to the iPod functionality and saying "Play these."
And if your app quits in the meantime while they're playing,
those songs are going to actually still keep playing.
Just like they do if you exit out of the
iPod app while you're using your phone today.
And that behavior is really not appropriate for games.
So as I say, I recommend that you
use the application music player.
So now let's put it together.
To construct the application music player, first you're
going to set it up with a queue of items for it to play.
These items are the MPMediaItems
or a collection of MPMediaItems.
Now remember, it's a queue.
Because we're just going play one song after
another as we go through of the items list.
We have control over the playback mode, so the
repeat mode and the shuffle mode here can be set.
And there's also some subtlety here as to whether you're
using the application music player or the iPod music player.
If you're using the iPod music player then
these modes you set will actually be sticky,
and if you're using the application
player they'll be localized to your app.
All right, now when we're using this object
controlling playback, play, pause, stop.
No problem there.
You also have the ability to move
through different items in the queue,
so if you want in your game you can have something
so the user can very easily skip to
the next item, say, in the play list.
So skip to next, go back to the previous,
skip to the beginning of the list, and so on.
So now, final example here of putting all of this together.
The top line we construct a query using that
code that I just showed you a few minutes ago.
So we have some compound query that we
have set up looking for a list of items.
And it's going to return to us
the songs that we want to play.
We create our MP MusicPlayerController here, we're
selecting the application music player variant of that.
We're going to set our repeat mode to repeat the
whole play list, so it will just play endlessly.
And finally here, we past to the music player a queue,
and we can actually just pass the query directly
to the player, and it will actually perform the query.
And so now the player will have a queue of items to play.
Now, just pause.
This is one scenario.
The other scenario was that maybe you had
popped up that built-in user interface
and have the user pick their music
that way, so you weren't using a query.
If that was the case, then the code
would look something like this.
In that delegate method of Media Picker did pick
media items, we follow the same sequence here,
but the place where we pass those media items into the
queue is done by calling set queue with item collection.
And that way now those results can get in as well.
But whichever one of those two paths you
came from, now you can play the music.
All right, so now we have our foreground
audio being played through OpenAL.
We have our background music sound
track coming from the iPod Library.
And we need to mix them together.
And yesterday at the graphics and media
State of the Union we talked a little bit
about this API called the AVAudioSession.
And this is the API that really makes it very easy
for you to control how that mixing behavior happens.
There's two particular categories that you can set in
the AVAudioSession that might be appropriate depending
on the audio behavior you need in your game.
So the first category that I want to talk
about here is called the ambient category.
This is appropriate for games that have their own perhaps
foreground audio coming from OpenAL but want to mix
with background music coming off of the iPod.
This category is not appropriate for games
that need to play their own background music.
So for example, if you have MP3s in your
game that you're going to be playing
and that's your background music sound
track, you should not use this category,
you should use the one I'm going to be talking about next.
But back on ambient now, this also
follows some of the recommended behavior
that we have for games running on the platform.
Number one, their audio should silence if
the user turns the ringer switch to silent.
And number two, the audio should
be silenced when the screen locks.
Now that other category that I was
talking about is called ambient solo.
So this is a category that's appropriate
for games that essentially want to take
over and play their own background music.
And play their own MP3s.
Around this category will interrupt any playback
happening from the iPod, and allow your application
to access the audio decoding resources
that are available on the device.
So this one also follows the recommended behavior for games,
obeying the ringer switch, and
silencing when the screen locks.
All right, so folks, here is a quick look at
how you can set up this audio session object.
So first we retrieve an instance to the audio session
singleton here, we're going to request the ambient category.
So this is appropriate now, because remember our scenario:
We want to be playing the foreground music from OpenAL
and have background music sound
track coming off of the iPod player.
So we want to mix.
And the ambient category allows us to mix those two.
We set up our session as active, and
now we can go on to continue to set
up OpenAL and set up access to the iPod library.
So there's actually a lot more functionality
that you can get at using the AVAudioSession API.
There's a number of other categories
that you might be interested in,
but really probably aren't appropriate
for games in many instances.
So it's only if you have a different kind of app
that you might want to go look into some of those.
But it also provides functionality to handle
interruptions and notify you of state changes that happen
in the audio system on the device, and enables you to set
your preferred hardware settings for different things.
And also there's a lower level C based framework called
the Audio Session Services API, that really provides you
with a lot of additional flexibility
and some more advanced behaviors.
Just one for instance of what you'll find there.
It's actually possible for you to
detect when your application starts
up whether there is already audio
being played from the iPod.
And you might use that knowledge
to make a decision about whether
or not to play your own background sound track for music.
And that decision should drive which one of those
audio session categories you choose for your game.